hi
good afternoon everybody and welcome to
our planetarium show for may of 2021.
let me just uh get this going for you
so here we have the screen showing
the view that we would have in the
afternoon of the middle of the month
may the 15th and this is generated using
software called stellarium which you can
download and play around with yourself
for free
it's absolutely fantastic
well i'll get the show going and what
we'll do as usual is
follow the sun down towards the horizon
as time moves swiftly forwards towards
sunset
so we'll let the time run faster than
normal down
and the sun will sink down here we go
horizon coming into view now
until around about eight o'clock in the
evening
at which point the sky will begin to get
dark
so we'll see the initial colors of
sunset
coming in now this guy turning that
orange
yellow color finally turning a deeper
red
and the sun just disappearing there now
the first object that we're going to
take a look at is the crescent moon
just the thinnest possible crescent at
this particular date
and you can see the very thin sliver
illuminated there
on the side with one or two stars in the
surrounding sky
just on the daylight side of the moon
there mountain
creatium the sea of crises that large
round impact basin
also visible in this shot then we've got
mars the moon and mars are very close
together
on the may the 15th so easy to find if
you can find the moon you can just
swivel left a little bit and you'll see
the red planet mars
here's a magnificent view of it that you
would get through a decent powerful
telescope
showing the disc of the planet getting a
little smaller now as it's getting
further away from the earth
and we've got the two moons there phobos
which is just disappeared behind
mars and demos so if we swing in
and close in right on uptight on mars
there you can see some of the desert
regions
in rusty colored uh orange
and the darker highland regions and a
large volcano and
as well as of course the polar cap there
but uh about two o'clock
on the screen so
that's the disc of mars as you would see
it with a powerful telescope
we'll pull back away again showing the
crescent moon and now the milky way is
just about visible
in the sky as well just below the moon
there
but we'll let time run forward until 10
15 one or two satellites whiz across the
sky rain
a whole train of styling satellites
there for a moment
so now the sky should be properly dark
and we should see all of the night sky
in its glorious detail
as we go on into the summer we do have
to stay up later and later to really get
that
now our first constellation we're going
to look at tonight is the constellation
of leo the lion
here's the stick diagram and it actually
looks fairly
similar to a lion in my opinion i can
make that out
there's the graphic to show you how it's
supposed to look
we'll take that away and we'll zoom in
on some of the
very lovely to look at groups of
galaxies leo's got several
groups of galaxies here's a little
cluster
that we can find now messier objects
number 95
96 and 105 and you can find them quite
easily
with a medium-sized telescope
you zoom in here let's have a look at
m96
very interesting shape uh who wants to
double loop to this galaxy isn't there
in the outer regions surrounding the
main spiral structure we'll move along a
little bit now
and look at m105
and it's more of an elliptical galaxy
with uh
without very much obvious structure but
it does have those two companions
so there's five galaxies to find in this
little group
just underneath the uh front paws of leo
and these are around about 35 36 million
light years away from us so they're not
part of our little local group that
extends for about 3 million light years
they're about 10 times further away
this is the famous leo trio the triplet
and this is m65 66
and ngc new general catalog
3628 didn't get a messier number which
i'm quite surprised by
so the two bottom ones there are the
messier objects but this one is
ngc 3628 very much a side-on
view showing the magnificent dust lane
and
possibly some sort of jet coming out of
the middle of the galaxy there at the
bottom
down towards that bright field star
uh slightly warped shape as well so the
other possibility is it's undergoing
some sort of
galactic collision now if we slew
over to the nose of leo the lion we have
a lovely bard spire on the catherine
wheel galaxy as i
call it ngc 2903 in the catalan
and again about 36 million light years
away
lovely spiral arms emanating from the
ends of the bar there
so that was leo the lion very much the
realm of the galaxies there are
many more galaxies to find in this part
of the sky
as we shall see we'll now move on
and we'll just pull back you've got the
moon and mars there in the bottom right
hand corner
and the twin stars of caster and pollux
in gemini
which is hosting mars at the moment
but we'll slew to the left of leo and
we'll let time run on to midnight
i'm going to concentrate on one or two
slightly less well-known constellations
again lots of satellites particularly
the starlink satellites whizzing across
next door to leo we have virgo again the
realm of the galaxies
this larger constellation covers quite a
big area of the sky
but has this very prominent bowl up to
the right here
there is uh virgo herself lying sideways
holding a bunch of flowers and some
palm fronds i think it's supposed to be
but if we zoom in just in the bowl in
the region between the tail of leo
this really is where to look and go
galaxy surfing
we have the virgo cluster and the
marcarian
chain of galaxies this whole row of
galaxies and the more
you look the more you see here we've got
the obvious
bright galaxies but there are lesser
smaller ones all over the field of view
can't go naming them all but well worth
having a look
you can hardly move for tripping over
them
they're around 50 million light years
away so a little bit further
and one of them m87 the giant elliptical
that we saw in the middle of the field
of view
is the one in which astronomers imaged
the first ever picture of the accretion
disk around a black hole
a couple of years ago using the event
horizon telescope
but just above virgo is a lesser known
constellation that consists
basically of these three stars called
coma berenices
bernice's hair it's supposed to be just
a bunch of hair tied up with a ribbon
rather a curious thing to choose for a
constellation
but i've chosen it for tonight because
again it contains some interesting
galaxies
here's the black eye galaxy a little bit
nearer 24 million light years you'll see
why it's called the black eye galaxy
looks like someone's punched it in the
face doesn't it
quite interesting and you really can see
it like that with a six or eight inch
reflector telescope because it's
relatively nearby and quite bright so
well worth looking for
that's the black eye galaxy
so pull back out again to the
constellation of coma
and the other thing that makes coma very
famous
is the coma supercluster if you thought
there are a lot of galaxies in virgo
this is the coma supercluster and it is
absolutely stuffed with them
10 times further away than the black eye
galaxy 250 million light years
so very much on the limit of an amateur
telescope but if you can
track it down there are dozens and
dozens of galaxies in that large cluster
and it was studying that large cluster
that led fritz vicki to first
suggest the existence of dark matter
back in the 1930s
rather nearer to home we've got the
globular cluster
messier number 53 here and you can see
another cluster just to the left there
so if you find
m53 you can slew left and see the rather
more open cluster
so quite a good contrast between the two
of them
so pull back from there
and the next object
in our tour of the night sky
is going to be much later
we'll let time run forward so that was
midnight so we're going to run it
right forward to just before dawn now
one thing you can see here that's worth
looking at with a pair of binoculars and
i should use the pointer
this grouping here this is the
melod one one one cluster it's a very
large structure
containing many stars you can just about
see it with the naked eye
as a misty patch if you uh have very
clear
skies but binoculars show it really well
it's about five degrees across so the
telescope tends to
just see it as a few stars scattered
around and you can
hardly make out the
size of it because you've drilled too
far into it
but the reason we're stopping at 5 40 in
the morning is because we've got some
planets to look at here's jupiter
the largest of the planets this is what
it would look like with a six-inch
reflecting telescope
the planet with the cloud belts across
the middle
and the four large moons
discovered by galileo laid out in a line
there
two on each side they change their
position hour by hour they orbit around
quite quickly
so it's worth looking at the beginning
and the end of your observing session
we've zoomed in a bit on the planet here
you can see the great red spot
and the cloud belts in more detail and
some of the lesser spots there in the
southern uh
belt there's white colored markings on
the surface
so there's the king of the planets
jupiter now we're going to have a look
at some of its moons i'm going to start
with
io the innermost of the large moons
this always looks very yellow in color
to my eye
and the reason is it's covered in sulfur
all these
colours we see here the black the yellow
the orange and the white are all
different forms of sulfur on the surface
of io
it's the most volcanic world in the
solar system
turning itself inside out almost with
huge eruptions
but we're also going to now take a
little peek at
this little little tiny moon and althea
this is the
fifth largest of jupiter's moons a small
almost sort of captured asteroid size
moon
much tinier than any of the
four large galilean ones but
it's just about detectable with amateur
equipment we've picked it up a number of
times
at the observing sessions that we do
at cambridge university public observing
second moon out from jupiter of the
galileans is europa
fascinating because it's covered in ice
which has these
grooves or cracks in the surface that's
letting some sort of organic material
escape from a briny ocean that's kept
warm by geological activity underneath
the surface of the ice there
a protected habitat possibly for some
form of alien life
um highly probable in my view the third
moon out the largest of
the moons in fact the largest moon in
the solar system
bigger even than the planet mercury this
is ganymede
and has a mixed surface one or two
impact crater scars there
but lots of glaciers and a fairly young
and active geological surface
again possibly shielding and underneath
the ice
ocean layer so again potentially
habitable
and fourth of the moons is callisto this
orbits
further away from jupiter and is less
affected by the tidal effects of
jupiter's gravity
so it's uh dead geologically and has
accumulated numerous impact craters on
the surface
that aren't being rubbed out by all of
the uh volcanoes
and geezers and ice flows that occur on
the other inner moons
so that's quick tour once around the
moons of jupiter
as we say now we'll have a look next
door at saturn
you can see it already in the same image
here it's the bright object
just to the right of the center of the
screen here and we'll
zoom in on that jupiter has just
overtaken
saturn passed by
and we'll pull away from it but this is
what it would look like with a small
telescope of course you wouldn't have
the labels
indicating which moon is which but it's
great fun trying to identify them from
looking at stellarium and then looking
at the telescope
and seeing which is which of course you
will remember your image might be upside
down or backwards
depending on what how many mirrors and
prisms you've got in your
optical train but this is saturn in all
its glory zoomed right in
with the cloud belts shadow of the
planet on the rings there that gives you
that 3d effect
and the structure within the rings with
the cassini division the dark
gap between the a and b rings now now
moving out to its
largest moon titan again about the size
of planet
mercury so a very interesting world in
its own right
covered in thick smoggy atmosphere
that's uh one and a half times as dense
as our own
and full of all sorts of interesting
organic molecules
carbon hydrogen nitrogen compounds
called phtholons
potentially the basis of the chemistry
of life
in the atmosphere of titan
and i'm afraid that's all we've got time
for this month so we're going to
bring the sun up and let
the stars fade out thank you very much